### Commentary Comparison for Joshua 3

#### [CONSTABLE]
**Joshua 3**
---
3:1-6
Joshua may have moved the nation from Shittim to the Jordan&rsquo;s edge at approximately the same time he sent the spies on their mission (cf. Jos 3:1-2; Jos 1:11; Jos 2:22). However, the sequence of events was probably as it appears in the text. Chapter 1 Jos 3:11 describes one three-day period during which the spies were in Jericho and the hills. A second, overlapping three-day period began on the next day (day four) with the people&rsquo;s arrival at Shittim (Jos 3:1), and concluded two days later (on the sixth day) with the officers giving the people last-minute instructions about the crossing (Jos 3:2-4). The people then crossed the Jordan on the next day (day seven). [Note: David M. Howard Jr., "&rsquo;Three Days&rsquo; in Joshua 1-3 : Resolving a Chronological Conundrum," Journal of the Evangelical Theological Society 41:4 (December 1998):539-50.] 

"Duty often calls us to take one step without knowing how we shall take the next; but if brought thus far by the leadings of Providence, and while engaged in his service, we may safely leave the event to him." [Note: Bush, p. 41.] 

God continued to lead His people by means of the ark. Whereas in the wilderness the cloudy pillar over the ark was the focus of the Israelites&rsquo; attention, now the ark itself became the primary object of their interest. The writer mentioned the ark 17 times in chapters 3 and 4. It was the visible symbol that God Himself was leading His people into the land and against their enemies.

". . . the ark was carried in front of the people, not so much to show the road as to make a road by dividing the waters of the Jordan, and the people were to keep at a distance from it, that they might not lose sight of the ark, but keep their eyes fixed upon it, and know the road by looking at the ark of the covenant by which the road had been made, i.e., might know and observe how the Lord, through the medium of the ark, was leading them to Canaan by a way which they had never traversed before; i.e., by a miraculous way." [Note: Keil and Delitzsch, p. 41.] 

Other frequently recurring words in chapters 3 and 4 are "cross" and "stand" used 22 and five times respectively. These words identify other emphases of the writer.

The people&rsquo;s self-consecration (Jos 3:5) consisted of their turning their hearts to God and getting their attitudes and actions right with Him (cf. Mat 3:2; Mat 4:17). God had previously promised to do wonders (Jos 3:5, awesome miracles) when they would enter the land (cf. Exo 34:10). Undoubtedly the people had been looking forward to seeing these miracles in view of what their parents had told them and what some of them remembered about the plagues in Egypt.

---
3:1-5:12
B. Entrance into the land 3:1-5:12

The entrance into the land was an extremely important event in the life of Israel. The writer marked it off in three major movements. Each one begins with a command from God to Joshua (Jos 3:7-8; Jos 4:1-3; and Jos 4:15-16), followed by the communication of the command to the people, and then its execution. The way the narrator told the story seems designed to impress on the reader that it was Yahweh who was bringing His people miraculously into the land.

1. Passage through the Jordan chs. 3-4

This section contains two parts: the actual crossing of the Jordan River (ch. 3) and the commemoration of that crossing (ch. 4).

The crossing of the river ch. 3

---
3:7-13
The miraculous parting of the Jordan was only the beginning of a series of miracles that demonstrated to the Israelites that their God was indeed among them. He was active for them and working through Joshua to give them victory (Jos 3:7).

This event bore many similarities to the crossing of the Red Sea (Jos 3:13; cf. Exodus 14). In contrast, Moses had divided the waters of the Red Sea with his rod. Joshua divided the waters of the Jordan with the ark that had become the divinely appointed symbol of God&rsquo;s presence since God gave the Mosaic Covenant (Jos 3:8).

Evidently the pushing back of the waters of the Jordan was to be a sign to the Israelites that God would push back the Canaanites (Jos 3:10). The title "the Lord of all the earth" occurs here (Jos 3:11) first in Scripture indicating Yahweh&rsquo;s absolute sovereignty over this planet. Because He was "the Lord of all the earth" He could give Canaan to the Israelites.

---
3:14-17
The Israelites crossed the Jordan when the river was at its widest, deepest, and swiftest, in late April or early May. As the snow on Mt. Hermon melts and the rainy season ends, the Jordan rises to a depth of 10-12 feet and floods to a width of 300-360 feet at this point today. Normally it is only 150-180 feet wide here. However, in Joshua&rsquo;s day the river may only have been full up to its banks, as the Hebrew text suggests. The people considered crossing the river at this time of year by swimming a heroic feat in ancient times (cf. 1Ch 12:15). This is probably how the spies crossed.

The town of Adam (Jos 3:16) stood about 18 miles north of Jericho near where the Jabbok River empties into the Jordan Valley. Interestingly, several earthquakes have sent much soil into the Jordan River in modern times at this very location, damming up the river for many hours (in A.D. 1267, 1837, and 1927). [Note: Barry J. Beitzel, The Moody Atlas of Bible Lands, pp. 37-38.]  Perhaps an earthquake is what God used in Joshua&rsquo;s day too. God may have supernaturally used a natural phenomenon, a landslide, near Adam to cut the waters of the Jordan off as they flowed south. [Note: Madvig, p. 272.]  Another possibility is that the phenomenon was completely supernatural. [Note: Campbell, "Joshua," p. 335.] 

Two million Israelites could have crossed the river in half a day if the procession was a mile or more wide. The dry ground (Jos 3:17) was a miracle too (cf. Exo 14:21).

The major emphasis in chapter 3 is on the great miracle that God performed to lead the Israelites into the land. The conquest of the land would continue God&rsquo;s works for His people, all of which they were to remember and appreciate.

"The people of God [i.e., Israel] must realize that God does not help them automatically. God helps them when they obey his commands given through his leader." [Note: Butler, p. 52.]

#### [GUZIK]
**Joshua 3**
---
3:1-17
Joshua 3 - CROSSING THE JORDAN

A. Instructions for crossing the Jordan River.

1. (Jos 3:1-2) Camping by the Jordan: Israel faces up to their own utter helplessness to accomplish what it set before them.

Then Joshua rose early in the morning; and they set out from Acacia Grove and came to the Jordan, he and all the children of Israel, and lodged there before they crossed over. So it was, after three days, that the officers went through the camp;

a. Came to the Jordan . . . and lodged there before they crossed over: God told the people of Israel to wait three days at shores of the Jordan River (Jos 1:11).  All that time, the people of Israel saw a rushing river, swollen with spring rains laying in front of them.  They must have asked, &ldquo;How can we ever cross this river?&rdquo;

i. It was one thing for a few spies to make their way across (as happened in Jos 2:1-24), but here we are talking about a nation of millions, with all their possessions - how will they make it?

b. At a moment like this, all the wonderful talk about living in the Promised Land can sound pretty hollow.  There is a seemingly impossible obstacle blocking the way - how will God do this one?

2. (Jos 3:3-5) The ark of God will lead the way.

And they commanded the people, saying, &ldquo;When you see the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, and the priests, the Levites, bearing it, then you shall set out from your place and go after it. Yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand cubits by measure. Do not come near it, that you may know the way by which you must go, for you have not passed this way before.&rdquo; And Joshua said to the people, &ldquo;Sanctify yourselves, for tomorrow the LORD will do wonders among you.&rdquo;

a. When you see the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, and the priests, the Levites, bearing it, then you shall set out from your place and go after it: Joshua didn&rsquo;t send his Army Corps of Engineers first.  Instead, he sent the priests who carried the ark of the covenant, which was the visible representation of God&rsquo;s presence with the people.  Joshua knew this was a spiritual problem, not a feat of human engineering.

b. Yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand cubits by measure: God required that they keep some 1,000 yards behind the ark.  This was for two reasons.  First, to respect the holy nature of the ark of the covenant.  But also, it was to make sure that everyone a clear view of the ark.  That you may know the way by which you must go shows that the ark of the covenant led the way.  Israel would accomplish this impossible task as they set their eyes upon God&rsquo;s presence, and followed only after His presence.

c. Sanctify yourselves: Because this would be a spiritual battle, Joshua requires that the people have a spiritual preparation.  Sanctify yourselves means they were to separate themselves from common things to focus in on the LORD, and to see that the LORD will do wonders among you.

3. (Jos 3:6) Joshua&rsquo;s step of faith: he sends the priests to walk across a swollen river Jordan.

Then Joshua spoke to the priests, saying, &ldquo;Take up the ark of the covenant and cross over before the people.&rdquo; So they took up the ark of the covenant and went before the people.

a. Take up the ark of the covenant and cross over before the people: We should assume that God told Joshua to do this, and that he wasn&rsquo;t working out of foolish presumption.  We can also assume that God spoke to Joshua about this as Joshua was in God&rsquo;s word, reading and remembering the crossing of the Red Sea.

i. We see Joshua&rsquo;s success depending on and growing out of the promise of Jos 1:8: This Book of the Law shall not depart from your mouth, but you shall meditate in it day and night, that you may observe to do according to all that is written in it.  For then you will make your way prosperous, and then you will have good success.  Joshua obviously had the word of God on his lips, on his mind, and in his actions.

b. So they took up the ark of the covenant and went before the people: Even with God&rsquo;s specific guidance, and with specific guidance from His word, this is still and impressive step of faith for Joshua.  Living and walking in the Promised Land comes from this kind of faith, not a slavish reliance on a &ldquo;law&rdquo; relationship with God.

i. Faith leads us into greater victories than law ever could.

4. (Jos 3:7-8) God&rsquo;s encouragement to Joshua.

And the LORD said to Joshua, &ldquo;This day I will begin to exalt you in the sight of all Israel, that they may know that, as I was with Moses, so I will be with you. You shall command the priests who bear the ark of the covenant, saying, &lsquo;When you have come to the edge of the water of the Jordan, you shall stand in the Jordan.&rsquo;&rdquo;

a. This day I will begin to exalt you in the sight of all Israel: As Joshua takes a step of faith, God encourages him all the way.  God always wants to encourage and help along our faith, but we may have our ears closed to His encouragement.

b. That they may know that as I was with Moses, so I will be with you: God will make Joshua a leader like Moses in the eyes of the people, and He will do it by using Joshua to miraculously lead the people across an impossible body of water.

c. After Joshua had obeyed the previous guidance, based on faith and his understanding of God&rsquo;s word, now God gives him more specific instructions: when you have come to the edge of the water . . . you shall stand in the Jordan.

5. (Jos 3:9-13) Joshua encourages and instructs Israel.

So Joshua said to the children of Israel, &ldquo;Come here, and hear the words of the LORD your God.&rdquo; And Joshua said, &ldquo;By this you shall know that the living God is among you, and that He will without fail drive out from before you the Canaanites and the Hittites and the Hivites and the Perizzites and the Girgashites and the Amorites and the Jebusites: Behold, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth is crossing over before you into the Jordan. Now therefore, take for yourselves twelve men from the tribes of Israel, one man from every tribe. And it shall come to pass, as soon as the soles of the feet of the priests who bear the ark of the LORD, the Lord of all the earth, shall rest in the waters of the Jordan, that the waters of the Jordan shall be cut off, the waters that come down from upstream, and they shall stand as a heap.&rdquo;

a. By this you shall know that the living God is among you: Joshua understands the way God connects events in our lives.  The fact that He will move on behalf of Israel here is taken as a promise of His future blessing and movement for them.

b. Behold, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth is crossing over before you into the Jordan: Joshua knows that the ark will lead the way - again, this is a spiritual battle to be won.

c. The waters of the Jordan shall be cut off, the waters that come down from upstream, and they shall stand as a heap: Joshua&rsquo;s general outlook, as communicated to the people, is refreshing.  The impossible problems in their way are not seen as an oppressive trial, but as a glorious opportunity to see God work.

B. Crossing the Jordan River.

1. (Jos 3:14-15) The faith of the priests and of Joshua.

So it was, when the people set out from their camp to cross over the Jordan, with the priests bearing the ark of the covenant before the people, and as those who bore the ark came to the Jordan, and the feet of the priests who bore the ark dipped in the edge of the water (for the Jordan overflows all its banks during the whole time of harvest),

a. The feet of the priests who bore the ark dipped in the edge of the water: The priests begin the procession, with the ark of the covenant some 1,000 yards in front of the people, and the priests came and walked right into a river that looked like it wasn&rsquo;t going anywhere.

i. Who knows how long the priests stood there in the river?  It might have been a moment; but it may have been a long time - but in a situation like that, a moment seems like a long time!

b. We usually want the river to be dry before we even make a step; but God was truly calling Israel to step out in faith.

c. For the Jordan overflows all its banks during the whole time of harvest: Joshua reminds us that this was not a time when the Jordan was reduced to a trickle.  Because of the spring rains, at this time of early harvest, the river was swollen and overflowing its banks.

2. (Jos 3:16-17) The Jordan is stopped and the people cross over on dry ground.

That the waters which came down from upstream stood still, and rose in a heap very far away at Adam, the city that is beside Zaretan. So the waters that went down into the Sea of the Arabah, the Salt Sea, failed, and were cut off; and the people crossed over opposite Jericho. Then the priests who bore the ark of the covenant of the LORD stood firm on dry ground in the midst of the Jordan; and all Israel crossed over on dry ground, until all the people had crossed completely over the Jordan.

a. The waters which came down from upstream stood still: In some miraculous manner, God stopped the flow of the Jordan River.  He may have used a natural occurrence (an earthquake has often been suggested), but the timing of it was at the hand of God.

b. As well, even with the flow of the river stopped, it was miraculous that the people could cross over on dry ground in the midst of the Jordan.  God miraculously dried the riverbed so that they didn&rsquo;t slog through marshy mud.

i. This miracle obviously connects with the miracle the nation knew some 40 years earlier: the passing through the Red Sea.  God brought them out of Egypt&rsquo;s bondage with a miracle, and He brought them in to the Promised Land with a miracle.

c. How did it happen? What was the key to this amazing miracle?  Notice the centrality of the ark of the covenant of the LORD.  The ark is referred to 14 times in these 17 verses.  This was all about the trust of Joshua, the priests, and Israel had in the God they knew was present with them.

i. The ark of the covenant cleared the way for Israel.  This was spiritual work, not work for Israel&rsquo;s &ldquo;Army Corps of Engineers.&rdquo;

3. To face such impossible challenges in our lives, we must look unto Jesus, our Joshua.  He always leads us.

a. Jesus is the fulfillment of the ark; He is Immanuel, which is translated, &ldquo;God with us&rdquo; (Mat 1:23).

b. Jesus has cleared the way to victory over all things: Having disarmed principalities and powers, He made a public spectacle of them, triumphing over them in the cross (Col 2:15).

c. As we keep our eyes on, and follow behind our victorious Jesus, the river of impossibility will dry up.

d. To the cynic, who wonders if they haven&rsquo;t tried that and been disappointed, we must ask them: &ldquo;Have you really tried this?  Have you truly walked according to God&rsquo;s word, trusted in Jesus and been disappointed?&rdquo;  Perhaps your disappointment is actually in your flesh.

#### [NICOT]
**Joshua 3**
---
3:1-17
C. CROSSING INTO THE PROMISED LAND: REMEMBERING GOD’S ACTS (3:1–4:24)1. The Crossing (Jos 3:1-17)1 Joshua arose early in the morning, and he and all the Israelites broke camp from Shittim and went to the Jordan and lodged there before they crossed over.

2 Three days afterwards the officers went through the camp

3 and gave the people the following orders: “As soon as you see the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God and the Levitical priests bearing it, then you yourselves are to set out from your place and follow behind it.

4 However, there shall be a distance between you and it of about two thousand cubits. Do not come close to it so that you may know the way you are to go, for you have not been over this way before.”

5 And Joshua said to the people: “Sanctify yourselves; for tomorrow the Lord will do miracles among you.”

6 Then he said to the priests: “Take up the ark of the covenant and pass over in front of the people.” So they took up the ark of the covenant and went in front of the people.

7 And the Lord said to Joshua: “This day I will begin to exalt you in the eyes of all Israel, that they may know that as I was with Moses so I will be with you.

8 As for you, give orders to the priests who bear the ark of the covenant: when you come to the edge of the water of the Jordan you shall stand in the Jordan.”

9 And Joshua said to the Israelites: “Come near to me and hear the words of the Lord your God.”

10 Then Joshua said: “By this you will know that a living God is among you and that he will certainly drive out from before you the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Hivite, and the Perizzite, and the Girgashite, and the Amorite, and the Jebusite.

11 Behold, the ark of the covenant, the Lord of all the earth, crosses before you into the Jordan.

12 Now then, take twelve men out of the tribes of Israel, one man from each tribe.

13 When the soles of the feet of the priests who bear the ark of the Lord, the Lord of the whole earth, come to rest in the waters of the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan will be cut off, namely the waters flowing from upstream, and they will stand in a single heap.”

14 Now when the people broke camp to cross the Jordan, with the priests bearing the ark of the covenant preceding the people,

15 and as soon as the bearers of the ark came to the Jordan and the feet of the priests bearing the ark dipped into the edge of the waters (the Jordan being full above all its banks, all the days of the harvest),

16 then the waters coming down from above stood; they rose up in one heap, a great distance, from Adam, a city beside Zarethan; while those flowing down to the Sea of the Arabah, the Salt Sea, were completely cut off. So the people crossed over opposite Jericho.

17 And the priests bearing the ark of the covenant of the Lord stood firm on dry ground in the midst of the Jordan, while all Israel crossed over on dry ground, until the whole nation had finished crossing over the Jordan.

Chapters 3–4 belong close together. Both describe Israel’s crossing of the Jordan. However, ch. 4, while providing some further details of the crossing not given in ch. 3, focuses especially on the erection of the memorial stones which must keep alive the memory of this great event for future generations; see 4:1–9; 20–24.

It will be well, in reading these chapters, to keep in mind the Hebrew narrative technique employed here. Some examples of this technique were given in the preceding chapter, see commentary on 2:15, 21b. In this technique the narrator concludes a certain matter (Jos 3:17; Jos 4:1), stating that the crossing was completed; yet at a later point (Jos 4:5, Jos 4:15.), he resumes his description of the crossing when necessary for the development of his topic. We prefer this manner of reading the account to that adopted by those who see these chapters as a composite of various traditions woven together by a redactor. [C. Steuernagel (Das Buch Josua, p. 216) considers ch. 3 to be made up of a basic source, called D2, to which a later redactor added occasional fragments from the E source. He suggests a similar approach to ch. 4. M. Noth (Das Buch Josua, pp. 31–33) believes that chs. 3–4 mean to report two traditions, one dealing with the erection of a monument in the river bed (Jos 3:12; Jos 4:4-7, Jos 4:9) and another dealing with a similar monument at the sanctuary of Gilgal (Jos 4:1-3, Jos 4:8, Jos 4:20-24). See also J. A. Soggin, Joshua, who holds that these chapters represent an ancient liturgy in which a Jordan “crossing” was symbolically enacted in a cultic ceremony. This cult act was subsequently “historicized” and became the story of the crossing; see also H.-J. Kraus, “Gilgal, ein Beitrag zur Kultusgeschichte Israels,” VT 1 (1951), pp. 181–199; and Noth’s criticism of this approach, op. cit., p. 33.] The element of suspense which this narrative technique injects into the account should also be duly noted. Examples will be furnished in the commentary below. [This suspense element is also noted in the commentary by D. Baldi, Giosué. Bibbia Garofalo (Turin: 1952) (not available to the present writer) and too quickly dismissed as without solid foundation by Soggin, op. cit., p. 59.] Of great importance is the use of certain terms throughout chs. 3–4; “to cross,” used on no fewer than twenty-two occasions, and “to stand,” used five times, indicate that “this narrative appears first of all as a uniform whole, theologically exhibiting a definite concern, and literarily held together by certain leading words. “ [So H. W. Hertzberg, ATD IX, p. 25. Hertzberg does note the various attempts to unravel supposed narrative strata in these two chapters, but also observes that the literary analysis of the materials has often left further questions which could not be answered satisfactorily. He has a valid concern to see the main purpose of the story recounted here: to highlight God’s gracious guidance of his people who, through the Jordan crossing, are now at last being ushered into the land promised to the fathers.]

The materials of chs. 3–4 could be divided along the following lines: Jos 3:1-6, preparation for the miracle; Jos 3:7-17, the divine miracle; Jos 4:1-14, specific details of the crossing; Jos 4:15-24, the erection of the memorial stones. Each of these sections begins with a command to Joshua, followed by an indication that the command was transmitted to the people and carried out subsequently.

Jos 3:1 Having heard the encouraging report of the two spies, Joshua now carries out without delay the divine command recorded in Jos 1:2. He rises early in the morning, [For this phrase cf. also Jos 6:12; Jos 7:16; Jos 8:10.] and he and all the Israelites break camp from Shittim, the same place from which the spies had been sent (Jos 2:1). Thus the people move close to the Jordan River, ready to cross it when the command is given. Though the words lodged there could refer to just one night’s stay, they can also be taken of a stay slightly longer in duration (cf. 2Sa 12:16 where the word means repeated lodging and Zep 2:14 where a more permanent lodging is envisaged). This accounts for the three days of Jos 3:2. In light of the subsequent dramatic developments one senses in the words before they crossed over something of the suspense element discussed above. This crossing will be the means whereby the “giving” of the land, so prominently mentioned in the preceding chapters (Jos 1:11; Jos 2:9, Jos 2:24), will become a reality.

Jos 3:2 The reason why the officers did not give further orders for the crossing until three days afterwards may lie in the fact that the Lord meant to impress upon Israel the seeming impossibility of that which he had commanded them to do. The Jordan, under any circumstance a formidable barrier (see commentary on 1:2), was at this time filled with the spring waters (Jos 3:15). Several days at Jordan’s banks would thus have served the purpose of trying the people’s patience.

The chronological connection between the three days in this verse and those of Jos 1:11 has been given more than one interpretation. It appears best not to identify the two. [This is also the position of C. F. Keil and F. Delitzsch, C. J. Goslinga, and B. Holwerda.] The three days of Jos 1:11 may have been an indefinite period (see commentary), allowing for the mission of the spies to have occurred in the meantime. This mission may have taken as many as four or five days. The three days here begin with Israel’s departure from Shittim. [J. H. Kroeze, Het Boek Jozua, p. 50, believes that Jos 3:2, Jos 3:4-5 must be linked with Jos 1:10-11, and that together these verses speak of what immediately precedes the crossing. Kroeze believes that the author at this point did not have a precise chronological order in mind and simply reported the story of the spies at the point where he needed it.]

Jos 3:3 The officers tell the people to take their clue from the movement of the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God and from the Levitical priests bearing it. This ark, emblem of the Lord’s indwelling amongst Israel, dominates the entire account of the crossing (see Jos 3:6, Jos 3:8, Jos 3:11, Jos 3:13-14, Jos 3:17; Jos 4:7, Jos 4:9, Jos 4:11, Jos 4:16, Jos 4:18). Thus the Lord, to whom the ark belongs, is presented as the One who actually enters Canaan ahead of the Israelites. As ark of the covenant the sacred chest is viewed as the container of the law tablets, the covenant statutes par excellence (Exo 25:21; Deu 10:1; cf. Num 10:33). This was one of several designations of the ark, but one well suited to express the idea that Israel’s privilege as God’s people was linked with the sacred obligation to keep the covenant that God in his grace had made with them.

The name ark of the covenant should not be taken as a later rationalization of an earlier, supposedly more “primitive” ark concept which conceived of the Lord as more directly associated with his cult object. [This view is widespread; cf. J. Steinmann, Josué, p. 37.] Some passages do stress the close link between the Lord and his ark (e.g., Num 10:35-36), but Num 10:33 indicates that such a conception is compatible with the use of the term ark of the covenant. [For a further elaboration of the many views concerning the ark, and an alleged development of its “theology,” cf. also M. H. Woudstra, The Ark of the Covenant from Conquest to Kingship, passim; see also “The Ark of the Covenant in Jeremiah 3:16–18,” in J. Cook, ed., Grace upon Grace. Festschrift L. J. Kuyper (Grand Rapids: 1975), pp. 117–127. There is no good biblical reason to deny, or be embarrassed by, the more “numinous” elements in the passages dealing with the ark. Only upon the tenets of comparative religion do such passages become embarrassing because such study is so often pursued from the viewpoint of evolutionism.] In fact, even in Josh. 3 the great significance of the ark is duly recognized. Its first mention precedes the mention of its bearers; cf. also Jos 4:11. This agrees with other references (cf. Num 10:33) where the ark is viewed as acting in an almost autonomous fashion, although nowhere does the OT suggest a magical or fetishistic understanding of the ark, apart from superstitious contexts such as 1Sa 4:3-4.

Those bearing the ark are called the Levitical priests, both here and in Jos 8:33. Elsewhere in the account they are simply called priests, with or without the addition: “Those bearing the ark.” The explanatory adjective “Levitical” (lit. “the priests, the Levites”) serves to distinguish these priests from others who were non-Levitical; see Exo 19:22, Exo 19:24. The restriction of the priesthood to the tribe of Levi, more particularly to Aaron’s family, dates from the desert period; see Exo 32:26-29; Num 25:7-13; Deu 18:5). [According to J. Wellhausen and his latter day disciples the expression the “priests the Levites” is a late, deuteronomic clarification, added after Josiah’s cultic reforms as described in 2 K. 22–23; for a rebuttal cf. O. T. Allis, The Five Books of Moses (Philadelphia: 21949), pp. 184, 193.]

It was the Levites, especially the sons of Kohath, who had been entrusted with the duty of carrying the ark (Num 4:4, Num 4:15). This custom is observed in Deu 10:8; Deu 31:25; 1Sa 6:15; 2Sa 15:24; 2Ch 5:4; 2Ch 35:3. On other occasions, however, the priests were assigned to perform that duty (Deu 31:9; 1Ki 8:3, 1Ki 8:6). [A comparison of parallel accounts in Kings and Chronicles points up certain differences in the respective functions of priests and Levites which have not yet been sufficiently explained. The LXX reads “the priests and the Levites,” as do the Syriac and Targum. However, the Vulgate reads sacerdotes stirpis leviticae, enhancing and strengthening the thought of the MT.]

The people at the bank of the Jordan are told to follow behind the ark and its bearers.

Jos 3:4 To impress upon the Israelites the ark’s great sanctity they are instructed that there shall be a distance between you and it of about two thousand cubits. Thus the sacred object is to proceed in full view of the people. There should not be any rash handling or inadvertent touching (cf. 1Sa 6:19; 2Sa 6:7). The ark was the symbol of the indwelling of the Holy One; cf. Num 7:89. The distance of 2000 cubits was approximately that of the outer bank of the Jordan to the inner bed, from el-Ghôr to ez-Zôr. Thus the people would still be on the outer bank while the feet of the priests touched the water’s edge (see Jos 3:8). [The distance of 2000 cubits was used later to mark off an allowable sabbath day’s journey (cf. Act 1:12). This was fixed by Jewish rabbis on the basis of Exo 16:29; Num 35:5. Some interpreters have appealed to this correspondence to suggest that the account of the crossing breathes a cultic spirit, but without sufficient ground.]

By seeing the ark descend to the Jordan the people would know the way you are to go. It will be an unusual way, one not previously used as a crossing. Perhaps there is already a hint here of the miracle that is to occur.

Jos 3:5-6 To prepare for the coming events the people are to sanctify, [From the Hebrew root qdš, the derivation of which is not completely clear. Some hold it to be from a root meaning “to cut,” others: “to be bright.”] or consecrate themselves. What this entailed may be seen from Exo 19:10, Exo 19:14-15; Num 11:18. Outward rites were meant to further inward openness toward God and his acts. These acts will be performed tomorrow. They are called miracles, lit. “things to be astounded at” [Heb. nip̱lā’ôṯ, Gk. thaumastá. Another Hebrew word used to describe a miracte is môrā, emphasizing the fear and dread which a miracle produces in the beholder; cf. Deu 10:21; 2Sa 7:23.] (see Exo 3:5). It is these marvelous acts of God which the believer is to celebrate (Psa 9:2 [Eng. Psa 9:1]; Psa 26:7; Psa 40:6 [Eng. Psa 40:5]; Psa 71:17). They are the very foundation of Israel’s redemptive history.

The sequence between Jos 3:5-6 shows that chronology is not the narrator’s chief concern. Verse Jos 3:6 reports the command by Joshua that the priest take up the ark of the covenant and pass over in front of the people. This command must have been issued on the day which is called “tomorrow” in the immediately preceding verse. No recognition of the time lapse between these verses is given. The report of the one event follows immediately upon that of the other. The same may be said about the execution of Joshua’s command by the priests. Verse Jos 3:6 reports that the priests did what Joshua told them to do. Yet it would seem best to hold that the substance of what is reported in Jos 3:7-13 took place and was spoken prior to the priests’ departure. Not until Jos 3:14 is there an actual description of the sequel to Jos 3:6. This shows that the order in which the events are reported is material rather than chronological.

The priests took up the ark. In the light of Num 10:35 this was tantamount to the Lord’s own “arising.” He identified himself with the ark. Its movements were his movements also.

Jos 3:7 Having reported, by way of prolepsis, the lifting up of the sacred ark by the priests, the narrator now reports words which the Lord speaks to Joshua, probably prior to the actual departure of the ark (see above). The Lord will begin to exalt Joshua through the events that are now taking place. Joshua will know that as the Lord was with Moses so he will be with him. This confirms what was said in ch. 1, where constant stress was placed on Joshua’s close connection with his predecessor (see Jos 1:3, Jos 1:5, Jos 1:7, Jos 1:17). The continuity of leadership which God himself had arranged already during Moses’ lifetime (Deu 1:37-38) will now become realized in Joshua’s exaltation. Earlier, attention was called to certain striking parallels in the careers of Moses and Joshua (see commentary on 1:5, 14, 17). The parallel that comes to mind here is Exo 14:31. Joshua’s exaltation will take place in the eyes of all Israel; see commentary on 1:2, 12–15. Cf. Jos 4:14; Jos 7:23; Jos 8:21, Jos 8:24; Jos 23:2; and related phrases in Jos 18:1; Jos 22:12, Jos 22:14, Jos 22:18; Jos 24:1.

Jos 3:8 Whatever the exact chronology of the events, the manner in which the narrative proceeds clearly contains an element of suspense. Joshua is now to give orders to the priests who bear the ark that when they come to the edge of the water of the Jordan they shall stand in the Jordan. Thus, in the narrative at least, one is brought to the dramatic point of the approach to Jordan’s bank. However, the execution of this command is delayed; in fact the command itself is not actually given until the events themselves begin to unfold. Nevertheless, the effect upon the reader is one of anticipation.

Joshua’s role with respect to the impending miracle of the parting of Jordan’s water is less direct than that of Moses at the Red Sea. Moses was himself instrumental in the miracle (Exo 14:16, Exo 14:21), but Joshua merely is to give orders. It may be that the Lord’s presence in the ark also plays a role in this difference. The ark had not been made when Israel left Egypt.

Verse Jos 3:8 does not specify what will happen when the priests actually do stand in the Jordan. This may well be another feature of suspense in this narrative. It would seem that this verse means to call attention to the initial planting of the feet in the river. What will happen then is not reported until Jos 3:13. [The very cadence of the Hebrew shows an awareness of the solemnity of the moment. See, e.g., the last few words of the verse: mê hayyarḏen ḇayyarḏen ṯa‘amoḏû. Note the somewhat chiastic connection, and the use of the pausal form of the verb. Verse Jos 3:9 also shows an unusual verb form in g̱ôsû hēnnâ (lit. “approach ye hither”); see GKC § 66c. The change of pace attracts the attention.] Verse Jos 3:8 thus becomes another prolepsis of what will be explained more fully at a later point.

Jos 3:9-10 Joshua now summons the people to him so that they may hear the words of the Lord your God. Although there has been no previous indication that the words following in Jos 3:10-14 had been imparted to Joshua, we may assume that this was so. At any rate, Joshua is God’s authorized spokesman; see also Jos 3:7.

By this anticipates what will not be explained until Jos 3:13. Again the account moves slowly. The announcement of the coming miracle without a complete statement of its nature serves to create a feeling of suspense.

Joshua’s explanation of the miracle’s meaning should not be used to argue that miracles are in themselves neutral and mute, subject to more than one interpretation. Nor does Joshua’s explanation give meaning to the miracle which otherwise it would not have. Rather, it only calls attention to that which is inherent in the miracle. True, miracles can be interpreted in several ways, but within the biblical view miraculous events have one unambiguous and clear meaning. Those who do not accept them as such fly in the face of evidence which all can see. Only blindness of mind caused by sin makes people misinterpret miracles. [There is a diversity of opinion about this point even among orthodox Christians. What is set forth above is, so we believe, the Christian theistic approach to reality and fact without which biblical scholarship will fall into many a pitfall.]

The coming miracle will make people know that a living God is among them. This will be an experiential knowing (Heb. yāḏa‘). The people will find out in a very practical manner, and will perceive [Hertzberg translates: “Daran werdet ihr merken”; Noth: “Daran werdet ihr erkennen.” These words suggest inward perception of truth which is part of the meaning of yāḏa.] that there is a living God among them. As living God [Heb. ’el ḥay; also ’elôhîm ḥayyîm (Deu 5:26; 1Sa 17:26; 2Ki 19:4).] God stands opposed to, and is different from, the gods of the nations who are always portrayed as unable to act or to save (Psa 96:5; Psa 115:3-7). These other gods are idols (Heb. ‘elîlîm; Lev 19:4). They are nothing but breath (Heb. haḇalîm; Deu 32:21; Jer 8:19). This living God is among Israel, which indicates his active presence with his people (Deu 6:15).

This living God, the Lord of history, will certainly drive out [Heb. yāraš. In the Qal this word also means “to possess.” Used in the Hiphil it assumes the meaning “to dispossess,” “to drive out.”] from before you the present inhabitants of Canaan. The inhabitants of Canaan are frequently enumerated in lists of various length in the books of the Pentateuch (Gen 15:19-21; Exo 3:17; Exo 23:28; Deu 7:1, etc.). Without being directly aware of it, they are awaiting the time when their iniquity will be full (Gen 15:16; Deu 32:8). The order in which they are listed differs. Here the order is: the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Hivite, and the Perizzite, and the Girgashite, and the Amorite, and the Jebusite. They are viewed here as seven in number (cf. Deu 7:1), possibly a number symbolic of fullness (Jos 9:1; Exo 3:17 list only six; Gen 15:19-21 ten). The term Canaanite is frequently used as a collective for all the inhabitants of Canaan regardless of racial origin. Here it stands for those living “by the sea” (Jos 5:1; Num 13:29; cf. Num 11:3). This name most frequently heads the list of the nations to be dispossessed. [For a complete discussion of the various lists see R. North, Bibl 54 (1973), pp. 43–62. Cf. also P. C. Craigie, Deuteronomy, on Deu 7:1; and C. H. de Geus, The Tribes of Israel. Studia Semitica Neerlandica 18 (Assen: 1976), passim.] For the Hittite see the commentary on 1:4. Gibeon belonged to the ethnic group of Hivites (Jos 9:7; Jos 11:19). They also lived in Shechem (Gen 34:2; cf. Jos 9:7; Jos 11:3). Scholarly opinion is not united as to their precise identity. [The LXX sometimes replaces “Hivites” with “Horites,” e.g., Jos 9:7; Gen 34:2, but no clear pattern emerges; compare the MT of Jos 11:3 with LXX. North concludes that there is no “evidence within the Bible of the genuine existence of an otherwise unknown clan called Hivites” (p. 61). R. de Vaux maintains that it is entirely arbitrary to correct Hivites everywhere to Horite or imagine them a branch or synonym; RB 74 (1967), p. 499. According to Jos 11:3; Jdg 3:3, the Hivites came from the north.] Perizzites lived in central Palestine during the patriarchal period (Gen 13:7; Exo 3:8, Exo 3:17; Exo 23:23). Their name does not occur in extrabiblical sources, and little is known about them. In Jos 17:15 they are connected with forested country (see also Jdg 1:4-5). It has been suggested that the Girgashites lived in the region where later the Gadarenes ( [Revised Standard Version (1952)] Gerasenes) lived, i.e. in Transjordan, near the Sea of Galilee (Luk 8:26), but little is known for certain about this. [The Girgashites have also been linked with the Hittite term Qaraqashi, which means the clients of the Sumerian god of light, Gesh. But no real relevance to the Girgashites seems to be established.] As for the Amorites, the Bible uses this term in both a wider and a narrower sense. In the wider sense it denotes the entire population of Canaan (Jos 24:15; Gen 15:16; Jdg 1:34-35), [Before Joshua’s time the Amorites, called amurru in Mesopotamian documents, were a powerful people. Hammurabi the great legislator belonged to them. The debate concerning their identity and origin continues; see A. Haldar, Who were the Amorites? Monographs on the Ancient Near East 1 (Leiden: 1971); and the critical review by J. R. Bartlett in Bible Bibliography (1974), p. 475.] but it also stands for the inhabitants of Canaan’s mountain regions (Num 13:29; Deu 1:7). [Sihon and Og are also called “kings of the Amorites”; Jos 2:10; Jos 9:10; Psa 135:10-12.] In all but one instance in Joshua (Jos 11:3) the Jebusites are placed at the end of the list. Like the Amorites they appear to have lived in Canaan’s mountain regions (Jos 11:3; Num 13:29). In Jos 15:8, Jos 15:63 they are connected with the region of Jerusalem (cf. Jdg 1:21; Jdg 19:10-11; 2Sa 5:6). [The suggestion has been made that the Jebusites were Hurrian. See, e.g., C. J. M. Weir, “Nuzi,” in AOTS, pp. 80–83, where the possible connection between Hurrians and other names mentioned in the Canaanite tribal lists is also explored. See also D. R. Ap-Thomas, “Jerusalem,” Idem, p. 286; J. M. Miller, “Jebus and Jerusalem: A Case of Mistaken Identity,” ZDPV 90 (1974), pp. 115–127.]

Joshua tells the Israelites that the living God will drive out all these nations before them. This will happen certainly, as the use of the infinitive absolute indicates.

Jos 3:11-13 Joshua now calls attention to the ark of the covenant (see Jos 3:3) which will cross before the people into the Jordan. The ark was such an intimate symbol of the Lord’s indwelling (cf. Num 10:35) that to speak of the ark is tantamount to speaking of the Lord whose ark it is. This is probably why the words the Lord of all the earth stand in apposition to the ark. [There appears to be no need, from our understanding of the phrase, to replace the word “covenant” with that of “Lord” as many do; the LXX reads “covenant,” but cf. Jos 3:13.] The phrase, which is also found in Mic 4:13; Zec 4:14; Zec 6:5, is a fitting one at this point. God’s sovereignty over the earth offers Israel, God’s people, a rightful claim to the land they are about to enter (cf. Deu 32:8-9). [F.-M. Abel, Le Livre de Josué, p. 26, considers the phrase “Lord of all the earth” to have been introduced here to counteract a tendency toward territorial particularism which he sees in Deu 32:9 and elsewhere. If Deu 32:9 is read in conjunction with the preceding verse, it is far from particularistic in a narrow and objectionable sense; Jos 3:9 does not require an antidote.] Already at this point (Jos 3:12), Joshua orders the setting apart of twelve men. This is another instance of anticipation and will be more fully developed in Jos 4:2. [Abel translates (paraphrases) correctly: “Dés maintenant, choissisez douze hommes.…” There appears to be no need, therefore, to think of two independent stone traditions, each speaking of a different monument, of which this would be a misplaced remnant (as, e.g., Noth, Das Buch Josua, p. 35).] These men are to be taken out of the tribes of Israel, one man from each tribe, thus providing another support of the “all Israel” emphasis (see commentary on 1:2, 12–16; 3:7). The narrative now moves to a decisive climax by giving the specific details of the miracle that will occur, as reported by Joshua to the Israelites. The fact that this can be announced ahead of time constitutes part of the miraculous element, whatever natural causes may have played a part in bringing it about. Everything will center on the ark of the Lord, the Lord of all the earth. Exactly at the time when the feet of the ark-bearing priests will come to rest in the waters of the Jordan, the parting of the Jordan waters will become a fact. Thus further information is given about what had been hinted at proleptically in Jos 3:8. The ark’s prominence should be noted, though this ought not to be considered in terms of magic. [For a “magical” understanding of most of the ark stories, cf. H. Schrade, Der Verborgene Gott: Gottesbild und Gottesvorstellung in Israel und im alien Orient (Stuttgart: 1949). For a critical evaluation of this approach see Woudstra, The Ark of the Covenant from Conquest to Kingship, pp. 55f.] There is a certain way in which it is not the ark but the faith of those who carry and follow it that will bring about the miracle. The stories in 1 Sam. 4ff. show clearly that a superstitious belief in the ark’s potency does not bring about the desired end.

Jordan’s waters will be cut off, namely the waters flowing from upstream, and they will stand in a single heap. The language here is somewhat reminiscent of Exo 15:8; cf. also Psa 78:13. The two events in which Moses and Joshua each played such a prominent role are thus closely connected. They also lie in each other’s redemptive historical extension.

Jos 3:14-16a The English translation of these verses is an attempt to follow closely the lengthy Hebrew constructions employed here. [The sentence of Jos 3:14-16 is continuous, consisting of three protases (Jos 3:14-15), the first and third of which are more precisely defined by a circumstantial clause, and of three apodoses (Jos 3:16). See KD, p. 44.] This is now the resumption of the main line of action, anticipated in Jos 3:6. The ark’s central role is again stressed. [The Hebrew expression here is hā’ārôn habberîṯ, with a definite article in front of berîṯ which rules out a construct-absolute relation. This may be read as “the ark, i.e., the covenant,” stressing the close association between the two. The tablets of the covenant contained in the ark are also called “the covenant.” GKC § 127 g judges that the word habberîṯ has been added by a redactor. Some of the earlier phraseology concerning the ark (see Jos 3:11) should caution against such an approach.] The narrative returns to the very beginning, when the people broke camp (lit. “when the people set out from their tents”). The master narrator, who has been using prolepsis and suspense to such good advantage, is again at work here. The reader is brought to the water’s brink, and sees the priests’ feet dip into the edge of the waters, but at that point another delay occurs by means of a lengthy parenthesis (Jos 3:15). Before reporting the actual parting of the waters, the narrator must note the condition of the Jordan at this time of year, it being full above all its banks, all the days of the harvest? [The phrase is not without certain difficulties. There is some question about Heb. geḏôṯ, translated “banks” by several, but “uitlopers” (“small side arms”) by Kroeze. And what about “all” of Jordan’s banks? A river has two banks, not many. Hertzberg omits “all”; JB “the Jordan overflows the whole length of its banks …”; DNV “Now the Jordan had gone entirely outside its banks.…” The difficulty may be connected with the geographical features of the Jordan, with its several sets of banks. See also Keil and Delitzsch, where three banks are mentioned: the upper and outer banks, the lower or middle banks, and the true banks of the river bed.] This accomplishes two things: it delays once more the crucial point of the actual miracle, and it focuses on the seemingly impossible situation under which the miracle will be performed.

Finally, the description of the miracle is given: the waters coming down from above stood. Anticipations of this had been given in Jos 3:4-5, Jos 3:8, Jos 3:13. The words rendered from Adam may also be read “at Adam.” [The difference is between the Qere mē’āḏām, and the Ketib ḇe’āḏām.] The city of Adam is probably to be identified with Dâmiyeh, 19 miles upstream from Jericho. If “from Adam” is indeed the correct understanding, then the account says that the Jordan waters were piled up over the entire distance from Adam to the point where the crossing took place. Taking the alternate reading, the waters stood and rose up at a point not visible to the Israelites. This would have resulted in a very wide stretch of river bottom suitable for crossing. [Most commentaries call attention to certain natural causes which may have contributed to the occurrence of the miracle at this time. An Arab historian reports that in a. d. 1267 landslides dammed the river for several hours. A similar occurrence took place in 1927.] The city of Zarethan, beside which Adam is said to be situated, is mentioned in 1Ki 7:46. There is no agreement as to its precise location. [For a useful discussion see Soggin, Joshua, pp. 6If.]

Of the waters flowing down to the Sea of the Arabah, [The Arabah is the continuation of the Jordan rift between the Dead Sea and the Gulf of Elath (Aqabah).] the Salt Sea—also known as the Dead Sea (a name not used in the OT)—it is said that they were completely cut off. According to one opinion the waters flowing down were other streams which were kept from entering the Jordan at points below the actual stoppage of the main flow.

Jos 3:16-17 The account now comes to a provisional conclusion by reporting how the people crossed over opposite Jericho, with some further remarks about the priests bearing the ark of the covenant of the Lord who stood firm on dry ground in the midst of the Jordan. This type of concluding statement concerning a certain aspect of an event reported agrees with the narrative style observed earlier (see Jos 3:6, Jos 3:12; cf. Jos 2:21). Thus a provisional rounding-off of this great account of the crossing is achieved. Ch. 4 will resume the story of the crossing to the extent necessary for the author’s further purposes.

Until the very end of the account, due stress is given to ark and priests (Jos 3:3, Jos 3:8, Jos 3:13). The ark, the supreme symbol of God’s indwelling, is viewed as directing silently the whole proceedings as the priests stood firm [Heb. hāḵēn, inf. abs. of kûn, used adverbially.] on dry ground. The narrator’s chief concern with this chapter has been to focus attention upon the stupendous miracle, wrought under the watchful eye of the Lord, whose ark led the way into the waters and then stood in the river bed while the whole nation [The word used is gôy, used also in Jos 4:1; Jos 5:6, Jos 5:8; Jos 10:13. In the rest of the chapter ‘am is used (Jos 3:3, Jos 3:5-6, Jos 3:14, Jos 3:16). ‘am stands for the people as an ethical religious community; gôy views them as a totality.] had finished crossing over the Jordan.

Later generations of readers would be encouraged by the recollection of this great act of God. The entry into the promised land with all its truly spiritual implications would thus be etched indelibly upon their hearts. Already during the OT period their minds would be “raised to Christ,” [J. Calvin, Commentaries on the Book of Joshua (E. T. Grand Rapids: 1979), p. xxii; see Woudstra, Calvin’s Dying Bequest to the Church: A Critical Evaluation of the Commentary on Joshua. Calvin Theological Seminary Monograph Series (Grand Rapids: 1960), pp. 24–28, 40.] who, typically, had accompanied them on their trek through the desert (1Co 10:4) and who, in the symbol of the ark, had stood by them in the death-like experience of Jordan’s crossing until they were safe on the other side. [About the typical meaning of the crossing of the Jordan cf. C. J. Goslinga, Het Boek Jozua, p. 31; S. G. De Graaf, Promise and Deliverance I (St. Catharines: 1977), p. 397.]
